## THOUGHTS ON SELECT TOPICS RELATED TO THE FLUOROPROBE (FP)
#### Author: Mary Lofton
#### Date: 06FEB26

This document is based on notes and conversation between Mary Lofton and Adrienne Breef-Pilz on 05FEB26. The goal is to share potentially helpful institutional knowledge related to the FluoroProbe with current and future members of the Carey Lab. These are just my opinions; please feel free to take or leave as it's helpful to you!

In general, if you are a graduate student undertaking a project that relies heavily on FP data, the instrument manual is your best friend. You should read it thoroughly, make notes, etc. The manual is at least as valuable as any of the Carey Lab-specific FP documentation. Also, keep in mind that while multi-wavelength fluorescence sondes are not incredibly common, they have been in use by research groups around the world for at least a couple of decades now. There are several worthwhile papers that compare FP-type measurements with other types of phytopankton data in lakes, and new papers do come out regularly. In addition, fluorescence-based data can be a bit controversial in the phytoplankton world, in that people do not always agree about how accurate or useful these measurements are, or exactly what they represent about phytoplankton community structure. So I'd recommend spending some time familiarizing yourself with the literature to understand the benefits and limitations of FP data.

**1. Mooring the FluoroProbe:** I have not done this often, mostly because Cayelan worries (reasonably) about losing the instrument to the bottom of the lake. I did moor the FluoroProbe to the catwalk at FCR for a few hours one afternoon in Aug. 2017 during a solar eclipse. It worked fine and was pretty informative because, to my memory, the reported biomass on the instrument dropped by about half during the course of the solar eclipse and then recovered pretty quickly afterwards - a helpful reminder that fluorescence data is subject to quenching and other dynamics that we would consider 'artifacts' of the measurement method. To my knowledge there is no reason (other than risking loss of the instrument to the bottom of the reservoir; ha!) that you couldn't moor it to obtain timeseries data at a specific depth.

**2. Benchtop work:** Using the FP to make measurements in a laboratory setting is also totally possible, but you will need to follow the instructions in the FluoroProbe manual in order to switch the instrument from field mode to benchtop mode. There is a black plastic benchtop stand and clear plastic cuvette that can be used with the instrument in benchtop mode. You'll have to ask the current Carey Lab manager where these are located. Most commonly, I have used the FP in benchtop mode to check its calibration post-maintenance at bbe moldaenke in Germany. There is a detailed guide to my recommendations for these calibration checks in the CareyLabVT/LabDocuments/docs/FluoroProbe calibration check SOP_02JUN20.docx file. In theory, you could also use the FP to take measurements for a lab or benchtop experiment with algal cultures if the type of data the FP collects would be useful for your research question. I have not done this. Similar to when you are handling manual chlorophyll samples, the lights in the lab should be turned off when you are using the FP in benchtop mode to avoid interference with the fluorescence measurements.

**3. Recreating bbe moldaenke's proprietary algorithm:** The FP uses a proprietary algorithm to convert relative fluorescence units (RFUs) at various wavelengths to biomass of different fluorescence-based groups. A good reference for the development of the method is Beutler et al. 2002 (see citation below). I have not made an extensive effort to recreate this algorithm. I suspect it is some sort of partial least squares regression or similar, but you should do your own research if recreating the algorithm is important to your work. The RFU data are published as part of the FP data package on EDI each year, so you can work with the raw values pretty easily if that's useful to you.

**4. Comparing FP measurements to other phytoplankton measurement methods:** To my knowledge, the only published comparison of FP data to phytoplankton microscopy data in the Virginia reservoirs studied by the Carey Lab is the supplement of Lofton et al. 2020 (see citation below). When comparing the FP to other sensors, remember that the FP's 'total biomass' variable is the sum of biomass measured using several different wavelengths of light (see the manual for more information). As a result, you should expect the 'total biomass' reported by the FP to be *higher* than the biomass reported by sensors measuring just a single pigment (such as a chlorophyll-a or phycocyanin sensor). Based on my experience, in general, the biomass values reported by our chlorophyll sensors (the CTD and the EXO) are most comparable to the biomass values reported for the 'green algae' fluorescence group on the FP. In other words, our chlorophyll sensors don't do a great job of measuring cyanobacteria or other types of phytoplankton that may contain notable concentrations of ancillary photosynthetic pigments other than chlorophyll. This is further supported by the fact that we do observe surface blooms (often cyanobacteria) at FCR that don't show up on CTD profiles or EXO chl-a sensor timeseries. In 2018, I did some preliminary comparisons between the EXO phycocyanin sensor that was deployed in FCR at that time and the cyanobacteria biomass readings from the FP. I found a fairly strong correlation, but the EXO readings were an order of magnitude lower than the cyanobacteria readings from the FP. This correlation should be re-examined before undertaking any research project that attempts to integrate FP and EXO phycocyanin sensor measurements. I *think* that manual chlorophyll samples tend to do a better job of accounting for cyanobacterial biomass and total phytoplankton biomass in general than the in situ chlorophyll sensors in our reservoirs, but further investigation on this is needed.

**5. Yellow substances and transmission:** Rightly or wrongly, I have mostly assumed that 'yellow substances' values from the FP represent DOC, and since DOC in our reservoirs tends to be fairly low most of the time, I haven't worried too much about it and have just left the factory calibration alone. But my understanding is that other researchers have found that adjusting the yellow substances offset is critical to accurate measurements using the FP in waterbodies with higher DOC. If you are concerned about it, I'd recommend to read the FP manual carefully to be sure you understand what the yellow substances offset is and also check for literature on this topic. You could also plot yellow substances measurements on the FP vs. DOC to see if my assumption holds up! :-) Re: transmission, I only worry about this if it's very low, and 'very low' is subjective. I might start to pay attention if it dropped below 70-80% and I couldn't identify a good reason why (a good reason why might be, for example, that you know there is a bloom at that depth, so of course the cells themselves are interfering with transmission). If you think the transmission measurements are off, that would be a good reason to send the FP back to bbe moldaenke for a maintenance check.

Hope it helps and best of luck with your research efforts! 

Beutler, M., Wiltshire, K.H., Meyer, B. et al. A fluorometric method for the differentiation of algal populations in vivo and in situ . Photosynthesis Research 72, 39–53 (2002). https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1016026607048

Lofton, Mary E., Taylor H. Leach, Beatrix E. Beisner, and Cayelan C. Carey. “Relative Importance of Top-down vs. Bottom-up Control of Lake Phytoplankton Vertical Distributions Varies among Fluorescence-Based Spectral Groups.” Limnology and Oceanography 65, no. 10 (2020): 2485–2501. https://doi.org/10.1002/lno.11465.
